The capybara or greater capybara (Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris) is the largest living rodent, native to South America.
It is a member of the genus Hydrochoerus. The only other extant member is the lesser capybara (Hydrochoerus isthmius).
Its close relatives include guinea pigs and rock cavies, and it is more distantly related to the agouti, the chinchilla, and the nutria.
The capybara inhabits savannas and dense forests and lives near bodies of water.
It is a highly social species and can be found in groups as large as 100 individuals, but usually live in groups of 10–20 individuals.
The capybara is hunted for its meat and hide and also for grease from its thick fatty skin.

The capybara and the lesser capybara both belong to the subfamily Hydrochoerinae along with the rock cavies.
The living capybaras and their extinct relatives were previously classified in their own family Hydrochoeridae.
Since 2002, molecular phylogenetic studies have recognized a close relationship between Hydrochoerus and Kerodon, the rock
cavies, supporting placement of both genera in a subfamily of Caviidae.

Paleontological classifications previously used Hydrochoeridae for all capybaras, while using Hydrochoerinae for the
living genus and its closest fossil relatives, such as Neochoerus, but more recently have adopted the classification of
Hydrochoerinae within Caviidae.
The taxonomy of fossil hydrochoerines is also in a state of flux.
In recent years, the diversity of fossil hydrochoerines has been substantially reduced.
This is largely due to the recognition that capybara molar teeth show strong variation in shape over the life of an individual.
In one instance, material once referred to four genera and seven species on the basis of differences in molar shape is now thought
to represent differently aged individuals of a single species, Cardiatherium paranense.
Among fossil species, the name "capybara" can refer to the many species of Hydrochoerinae that are more closely related to
the modern Hydrochoerus than to the "cardiomyine" rodents like Cardiomys.
The fossil genera Cardiatherium, Phugatherium, Hydrochoeropsis, and Neochoerus are all capybaras under that concept.

The capybara has a heavy, barrel-shaped body and short head, with reddish-brown fur on the upper part of its body that turns
yellowish-brown underneath.
Its sweat glands can be found in the surface of the hairy portions of its skin, an unusual trait among rodents.
The animal lacks down hair, and its guard hair differs little from over hair.

Adult capybaras grow to 106 to 134 cm (3.48 to 4.40 ft) in length, stand 50 to 62 cm (20 to 24 in) tall at the withers, and
typically weigh 35 to 66 kg (77 to 146 lb), with an average in the Venezuelan llanos of 48.9 kg (108 lb).
Females are slightly heavier than males.
The top recorded weights are 91 kg (201 lb) for a wild female from Brazil and 73.5 kg (162 lb) for a wild male from Uruguay.
Also, an 81 kg individual was reported in São Paulo in 2001 or 2002.
Capybaras have slightly webbed feet and vestigial tails.
Their hind legs are slightly longer than their forelegs; they have three toes on their rear feet and four toes on their front feet.
Their muzzles are blunt, with nostrils, and the eyes and ears are near the top of their heads.

Its karyotype has 2n = 66 and FN = 102, meaning it has 66 chromosomes with a total of 102 arms.

Capybaras are semiaquatic mammals found throughout all countries of South America except Chile.
They live in densely forested areas near bodies of water, such as lakes, rivers, swamps, ponds, and marshes, as well
as flooded savannah and along rivers in the tropical rainforest.
They are superb swimmers and can hold their breath underwater for up to five minutes at a time.
Capybaras have flourished in cattle ranches.
They roam in home ranges averaging 10 hectares (25 acres) in high-density populations.

Many escapees from captivity can also be found in similar watery habitats around the world.
Sightings are fairly common in Florida, although a breeding population has not yet been confirmed.
In 2011, one specimen was spotted on the Central Coast of California.
These escaped populations occur in areas where prehistoric capybaras inhabited; late Pleistocene capybaras
inhabited Florida and Hydrochoerus hesperotiganites in California and Hydrochoerus gaylordi in Grenada, and feral capybaras
in North America may actually fill the ecological niche of the Pleistocene species.